Blogpost for honor PV reclaim policy fix moving to Beta (#46890)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-06-19-Honor-PV-Reclaim-Policy-Beta.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.31: Prevent PersistentVolume leaks when deleting out of order'
date: 2024-XX-XX
slug: kubernetes-1-31-prevent-persistentvolume-leaks-when-deleting-out-of-order
author: >
  Deepak Kinni (Broadcom)
---

[PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) (or PVs for short) are

> associated with [Reclaim Policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#reclaim-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
associated with [Reclaim Policy](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#reclaim-policy).
```

The Reclaim Policy is used to determine the actions that need to be taken by the storage

> backend on deletion of the PV.

Reviewer 2: This could be read as the action is taken _when_ a PV is deleted, while it's PVC. I can see you have it correctly below, not sure if it's worth rephrasing here.

Author: Updated.

Where the reclaim policy is `Delete`, the expectation is that the storage backend
releases the storage resource that was allocated for the PV. In essence, the reclaim
policy needs to honored on PV deletion.

With the recent Kubernetes v1.31 release, a beta feature lets you configure your
cluster to behave that way and honor the configured reclaim policy.

## How did reclaim work in previous Kubernetes releases?

[PersistentVolumeClaim](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#Introduction) (or PVC for short) is

> a request for storage by a user. A PV and PVC are considered [Bound](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#Binding)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a user's request for storage. A PV and PVC are considered [Bound](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#Binding)
```

if there is a newly created PV or a matching PV is found. The PVs themselves are
backed by a volume allocated by the storage backend.

Normally, if the volume is to be deleted, then the expectation is to delete the

> PVC for a bound PV-PVC pair. However, there are no restrictions to delete a PV
> prior to deleting a PVC.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PVC for a bound PV-PVC pair. However, there are no restrictions on deleting a PV
before deleting a PVC.
```

> First, I'll demonstrate the behavior for clusters that are running an older version of Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, I'll demonstrate the behavior for clusters running an older version of Kubernetes.
```

> #### Retrieve an PVC that is bound to a PV

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Retrieve a PVC that is bound to a PV
```

Retrieve an existing PVC `example-vanilla-block-pvc`
```
kubectl get pvc example-vanilla-block-pvc
```

> The following output shows the PVC and it's `Bound` PV, the PV is shown under the `VOLUME` column:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following output shows the PVC and its `Bound` PV; the PV is shown under the `VOLUME` column:
```

```
NAME                        STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS               AGE
example-vanilla-block-pvc   Bound    pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da   5Gi        RWO            example-vanilla-block-sc   19s
```

#### Delete PV

When I try to delete a bound PV, the cluster blocks and the `kubectl` tool does
not return back control to the shell; for example:

```
kubectl delete pv pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da
```

```
persistentvolume "pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da" deleted
^C
```

#### Retrieving the PV:
```
kubectl get pv pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da
```

> It can be observed that the PV is in `Terminating` state

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It can be observed that the PV is in a `Terminating` state
```

```
NAME                                       CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS        CLAIM                               STORAGECLASS               REASON   AGE
pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da   5Gi        RWO            Delete           Terminating   default/example-vanilla-block-pvc   example-vanilla-block-sc            2m23s
```

#### Delete PVC

```
kubectl delete pvc example-vanilla-block-pvc
```

The following output is seen if the PVC gets successfully deleted:
```
persistentvolumeclaim "example-vanilla-block-pvc" deleted
```

The PV object from the cluster also gets deleted. When attempting to retrieve the PV
it will be observed that the PV is no longer found:

```
kubectl get pv pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da
```

```
Error from server (NotFound): persistentvolumes "pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da" not found
```

> Although the PV is deleted the underlying storage resource is not deleted, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although the PV is deleted, the underlying storage resource is not deleted and
```

needs to be removed manually.

> To sum it up, the reclaim policy associated with the Persistent Volume is currently

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To sum up, the reclaim policy associated with the Persistent Volume is currently
```

> ignored under certain circumstance. For a `Bound` PV-PVC pair the ordering of PV-PVC

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ignored under certain circumstances. For a `Bound` PV-PVC pair, the ordering of PV-PVC
```

deletion determines whether the PV reclaim policy is honored. The reclaim policy

> is honored if the PVC is deleted first, however, if the PV is deleted prior to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is honored if the PVC is deleted first; however, if the PV is deleted prior to
```

> deleting the PVC then the reclaim policy is not exercised. As a result of this behavior,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
deleting the PVC, then the reclaim policy is not exercised. As a result of this behavior,
```

the associated storage asset in the external infrastructure is not removed.

## PV reclaim policy with Kubernetes v1.31

The new behavior ensures that the underlying storage object is deleted from the backend when users attempt to delete a PV manually.

#### How to enable new behavior?

> To make use of the new behavior, you must have upgraded your cluster to the v1.31 release of Kubernetes.
> You need to make sure that you are running the CSI [`external-provisioner`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner) version `5.0.1`, or later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To take advantage of the new behavior, you must have upgraded your cluster to the v1.31 release of Kubernetes
and run the CSI [`external-provisioner`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner) version `5.0.1` or later.
```

#### How does it work?

> For CSI volumes, the new behavior is achieved by adding a finalizer `external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer` on new and existing PVs, the finalizer is only removed after the storage from backend is deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For CSI volumes, the new behavior is achieved by adding a finalizer `external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer` on new and existing PVs. The finalizer is only removed after the storage from the backend is deleted.
`

```
kubectl get pv pvc-a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53 -o yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  annotations:
    pv.kubernetes.io/provisioned-by: csi.vsphere.vmware.com
  creationTimestamp: "2021-11-17T19:28:56Z"
  finalizers:
  - kubernetes.io/pv-protection
  - external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer
  name: pvc-a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53
  resourceVersion: "194711"
  uid: 087f14f2-4157-4e95-8a70-8294b039d30e
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  capacity:
    storage: 1Gi
  claimRef:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
    name: example-vanilla-block-pvc
    namespace: default
    resourceVersion: "194677"
    uid: a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53
  csi:
    driver: csi.vsphere.vmware.com
    fsType: ext4
    volumeAttributes:
      storage.kubernetes.io/csiProvisionerIdentity: 1637110610497-8081-csi.vsphere.vmware.com
      type: vSphere CNS Block Volume
    volumeHandle: 2dacf297-803f-4ccc-afc7-3d3c3f02051e
  persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Delete
  storageClassName: example-vanilla-block-sc
  volumeMode: Filesystem
status:
  phase: Bound
```

> The presence of the finalizer prevents the PV object from being removed from the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The the finalizer prevents the PV object from being removed from the
```

Reviewer 4: Another way to use the active voice: say that Kubernetes prevents removal of the PV whilst there are any finalizers set on it. And then, if you're happy to, rewrite the next sentence (“As stated previously&hellip;”) to also be active voice.

cluster. As stated previously, the finalizer is only removed from the PV object
after it is successfully deleted from the storage backend. To learn more about
finalizers, please refer to [Using Finalizers to Control Deletion](/blog/2021/05/14/using-finalizers-to-control-deletion/).

Similarly, the finalizer `kubernetes.io/pv-controller` is added to dynamically provisioned in-tree plugin volumes.

#### What about CSI migrated volumes?

> The fix is applicable to CSI migrated volumes as well. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The fix applies to CSI migrated volumes as well. 
```

### Some caveats

> The fix is not applicable to statically provisioned in-tree plugin volumes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The fix does not apply to statically provisioned in-tree plugin volumes.
```

### References

* [KEP-2644](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/2644-honor-pv-reclaim-policy)
* [Volume leak issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner/issues/546)

### How do I get involved?

The Kubernetes Slack channel [SIG Storage communication channels](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-storage/README.md#contact) are great mediums to reach out to the SIG Storage and migration working group teams.

Special thanks to the following people for the insightful reviews, thorough consideration and valuable contribution:

* Fan Baofa (carlory)
* Jan Šafránek (jsafrane)
* Xing Yang (xing-yang)
* Matthew Wong (wongma7)

> Those interested in getting involved with the design and development of CSI or any part of the Kubernetes Storage system, join the [Kubernetes Storage Special Interest Group (SIG)](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage). We’re rapidly growing and always welcome new contributors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Join the [Kubernetes Storage Special Interest Group (SIG)](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) if you're interested in getting involved with the design and development of CSI or any part of the Kubernetes Storage system. We’re rapidly growing and always welcome new contributors.
```

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.31: Prevent PersistentVolume leaks when deleting out of order'

> date: 2024-XX-XX

Reviewer 5: Please change this to 2024-08-16, and also update the blog file name to match it.

slug: kubernetes-1-31-prevent-persistentvolume-leaks-when-deleting-out-of-order
author: >
  Deepak Kinni (Broadcom)
---

[PersistentVolume](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) (or PVs for short) are
associated with [Reclaim Policy](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#reclaim-policy).

> The Reclaim Policy is used to determine the actions that need to be taken by the storage

Reviewer 5: No need to capitalize the first letters when spelling "reclaim policy".

backend on deletion of the PVC Bound to a PV.
When the reclaim policy is `Delete`, the expectation is that the storage backend
releases the storage resource allocated for the PV. In essence, the reclaim
policy needs to be honored on PV deletion.

With the recent Kubernetes v1.31 release, a beta feature lets you configure your
cluster to behave that way and honor the configured reclaim policy.

## How did reclaim work in previous Kubernetes releases?

[PersistentVolumeClaim](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#Introduction) (or PVC for short) is
a user's request for storage. A PV and PVC are considered [Bound](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#Binding)
if a newly created PV or a matching PV is found. The PVs themselves are

> backed by a volume allocated by the storage backend.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
backed by volumes allocated by the storage backend.
```

Normally, if the volume is to be deleted, then the expectation is to delete the
PVC for a bound PV-PVC pair. However, there are no restrictions on deleting a PV
before deleting a PVC.

First, I'll demonstrate the behavior for clusters running an older version of Kubernetes.

#### Retrieve a PVC that is bound to a PV

Retrieve an existing PVC `example-vanilla-block-pvc`
```
kubectl get pvc example-vanilla-block-pvc
```

> The following output shows the PVC and its `Bound` PV; the PV is shown under the `VOLUME` column:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following output shows the PVC and its bound PV; the PV is shown under the `VOLUME` column:
```

```
NAME                        STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS               AGE
example-vanilla-block-pvc   Bound    pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da   5Gi        RWO            example-vanilla-block-sc   19s
```

#### Delete PV

> When I try to delete a bound PV, the cluster blocks and the `kubectl` tool does

Reviewer 5: We may want to say that the kubectl session is blocked rather than the cluster is blocked, right?

^C
```

#### Retrieving the PV:
```
kubectl get pv pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da
```

It can be observed that the PV is in a `Terminating` state
```
NAME                                       CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   RECLAIM POLICY   STATUS        CLAIM                               STORAGECLASS               REASON   AGE
pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da   5Gi        RWO            Delete           Terminating   default/example-vanilla-block-pvc   example-vanilla-block-sc            2m23s
```

#### Delete PVC

```
kubectl delete pvc example-vanilla-block-pvc
```

The following output is seen if the PVC gets successfully deleted:
```
persistentvolumeclaim "example-vanilla-block-pvc" deleted
```

The PV object from the cluster also gets deleted. When attempting to retrieve the PV
it will be observed that the PV is no longer found:

```
kubectl get pv pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da
```

```
Error from server (NotFound): persistentvolumes "pvc-6791fdd4-5fad-438e-a7fb-16410363e3da" not found
```

Although the PV is deleted, the underlying storage resource is not deleted and
needs to be removed manually.

> To sum up, the reclaim policy associated with the Persistent Volume is currently

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To sum up, the reclaim policy associated with the PersistentVolume is currently
```

ignored under certain circumstances. For a `Bound` PV-PVC pair, the ordering of PV-PVC
deletion determines whether the PV reclaim policy is honored. The reclaim policy
is honored if the PVC is deleted first; however, if the PV is deleted prior to
deleting the PVC, then the reclaim policy is not exercised. As a result of this behavior,
the associated storage asset in the external infrastructure is not removed.

## PV reclaim policy with Kubernetes v1.31

The new behavior ensures that the underlying storage object is deleted from the backend when users attempt to delete a PV manually.

#### How to enable new behavior?

To take advantage of the new behavior, you must have upgraded your cluster to the v1.31 release of Kubernetes
and run the CSI [`external-provisioner`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner) version `5.0.1` or later.

#### How does it work?

> For CSI volumes, the new behavior is achieved by adding a finalizer `external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer` on new and existing PVs. The finalizer is only removed after the storage from the backend is deleted.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For CSI volumes, the new behavior is achieved by adding a finalizer `external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer`
on new and existing PVs. The finalizer is only removed after the storage from the backend is deleted.
```

```
kubectl get pv pvc-a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53 -o yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  annotations:
    pv.kubernetes.io/provisioned-by: csi.vsphere.vmware.com
  creationTimestamp: "2021-11-17T19:28:56Z"
  finalizers:
  - kubernetes.io/pv-protection
  - external-provisioner.volume.kubernetes.io/finalizer
  name: pvc-a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53
  resourceVersion: "194711"
  uid: 087f14f2-4157-4e95-8a70-8294b039d30e
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  capacity:
    storage: 1Gi
  claimRef:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
    name: example-vanilla-block-pvc
    namespace: default
    resourceVersion: "194677"
    uid: a7b7e3ba-f837-45ba-b243-dec7d8aaed53
  csi:
    driver: csi.vsphere.vmware.com
    fsType: ext4
    volumeAttributes:
      storage.kubernetes.io/csiProvisionerIdentity: 1637110610497-8081-csi.vsphere.vmware.com
      type: vSphere CNS Block Volume
    volumeHandle: 2dacf297-803f-4ccc-afc7-3d3c3f02051e
  persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Delete
  storageClassName: example-vanilla-block-sc
  volumeMode: Filesystem
status:
  phase: Bound
```

> The the finalizer prevents the PV object from being removed from the

Reviewer 6: Remove the extra "the" from here.
